---
layout: post
title:  "Fresh coat of paint"
date:   2015-08-24 07:31
categories: blog
tags:
image: /assets/article_images/2015-08-24-fresh-coat-of-paint/paint-small.jpg
---
Over the past few days, I've been thinkering with this blog. Mainly, I got
bored of the way it looked, and just wanted to have something a bit more
neutral.

I'm not bashing the way the previous one looked: it had a very definite style
that I still very much enjoy, but it just didn't quite feel polished enough.
I've decided to switch blogging engines (I'm now using Jekyll instead of
Pelican), and you can find the new theme information on the about page if you
care. All content, obviously, remains available under a Create Commons license.

I've also taken this new theme opportunity to pimp things a bit. I'm sure you
noticed the massive cover picture in this article. With the previous design, I
prided myself that the page loaded very quickly, with just a few kb of data.
I've decided to go for heavier pages, but at least, it looks and feels more
*dans l'air du temps*.

Because we'll be moving soon, and our internet connectivity is bound to be all
over the place, I also relocated the hosting of the blog to one of my servers,
instead of the raspberry pi hosted at home. This should mean better uptime and
higher bandwidth.

As it turns out, this server is starting to get quite loaded. Between all the
applications and websites it's running, I'm starting to feel like a proper
webhost :). The only issue is that I do it for free, most of the time. I might
have to start thinking about either getting something beefier, or moving back
to having multiple dedicated servers at the same time.

Because my new job doesn't really require me to work with servers that much, I
kind of feel an urge to play with mine more. At Interact-IV, I was fixing
servers left and right all the time (well, maybe not all the time, but
regularly). At Realm, we don't have the same kind of hosting business at all,
so unless you count the continuous integration server in the Copenhagen office
that falls over every few days, I really don't get to exercise my sysadmin
skills as much as I used to.

I guess it's the right time of year to ask me for help setting up your servers
:).
